From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist and
Scott Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number two 66.
Recorded live Thursday, May 12th, 2011. Support
for Hanselman is provided by
Tellerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Chris cells
about the pressure to release
software as open source versus
the pressure to make money
as a business. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
It's too much too soon,
but it's Chris sells and
he's back. How's it going,
sir? Too much too soon?
I don't know I was
doing well right up until
you said that. It's always
funny. Whenever I have Richard
on the show, like two
shows in a row, or
like too much, Richard, I'm
like really, really 260 shows
Richard on twice. That's a
problem for you. It is
awesome. Anyway, so I don't
know why anyone would have
that complaint. That is true.
That is true. Hey, yesterday
we were talking on the
phone and sometimes when I
talk to you and we
have such a great conversation,
I stopped the conversation and
said, we can't have this
talk right now because we
have to have it while
recording, which means that I
either need to quash the
mood. And then we start
talking later, which is, is
hard. Or I just run
over to your house with
a microphone and start recording.
I don't know. I feel
like I need to have
some kind of a device
plugged into my phone where
I can record any call
that could potentially be compelling.
But we were talking about
how, you know, normal people
might have trouble with that.
Yes. Having someone say, I'm
going to record this, is
that a problem at any
moment might be, might be
an issue yesterday. We had
a Google Chromebook came out
and it just felt like
I'm just getting a little
tired of people hating on,
on Microsoft. So I made
the comment to you that,
you know, we, we are
a lot less evil than
I think than people realize.
And we're certainly a lot
less organized than people here
a lot less organized than
we would need to be,
to be as evil as
people think we are. Yeah.
I mean, it's like imagining
that the government actually had
his shit together enough to
be able to pull off
the controversies that we credit
them with. Right. Microsoft is
very much along those same
lines. Right. Right. And, and
I, I wonder is, you
know, is Apple that organized
is Google that organized? And
it seems like in the
last couple of, I don't
know, last couple of five
years, you know, Google was
incredibly not. And Apple only
recently became evil just because
of some draconian app store
thing, some very crisp language
on behalf of, of Steve
jobs. And, and then Microsoft
were still evil. So now
we have three evil companies
instead of just one. And
I was kind of hoping
things would flip around and
people would realize that we're
not really that evil. And
it seems like some groups
are recognized as being less
evil. Like I think web
platform and tools, you know,
if I may be so
bold and Your team, that's
amazing. Yeah. It's funny how
that works out. That may
just be because I live
in that bubble, but you
know, we're doing our best,
right? We, we, we, we
try every day to suck
less, but then I was
thinking, you know, maybe it
would just all be peaches
and cream and puppies over
like working for an open
source company. And you challenged
that idea that, that it's
all magic and at a
company that does nothing but
open source. Well, it's interesting.
So I have two immediate
reactions to what you just
said. One was when I
came to Microsoft a little
over seven years ago, I
never thought I would last.
I never thought I would
like it. I never thought
I would fit in. And
I really did expect everyone
to have a maniacal laugh.
Whenever we talked about what
the customers wanted off, off,
we don't care what the
customers want. We will give
them what they need and
they will give us money
and awe. And that is,
I mean, maybe it's a
little overplayed, but it is
what I expected the attitude
to be like. And I
was completely bowled over when
I actually started working with
people, real people at Microsoft.
And I've worked in seven
years. I've worked at a
number of teams with a
number of different people. And
I can't tell you how
important the customer is to
just everyone at Microsoft. You
know, I've hung out with
VPs and, and you know,
brand new, new college grads
and everyone in between. And
everyone that I've run into
practically, everyone cares, deeply passionate
about what the customer wants.
So one, I don't actually
think Microsoft is evil. I
think we do things that
I disagree with, but you
know, any, anytime you have
two or more people together,
that's what happens, right. People
will do things that you
disagree with. So that's one
thing. And the other thing
is this idea that any
company can do things that
everyone will like is crazy,
right? I mean, he said,
Oh, Apple, everyone loves Apple.
I can't tell you how
many people I've run into
that negative opinions of Apple
and a vehement negative opinions.
Now, me personally, I've had
a couple of I-phones I've
liked it, a great deal.
My sons have had some
iPods and iPhones and they've
liked them. I played around
with an iPad for awhile.
I mean, in general, I'm
a, I'm a fan of
Apple products. Even before I
came to windows years and
years ago, I had a
Macintosh to CX or $6,000
in 1990, which was just
all the money in the
world to me. And I
loved it. I absolutely loved
it. So, so you know,
the idea that you can
go and work for some
company that everyone loves is,
is hard to imagine. Are
these companies doing stuff because
they're evil or is just
that evil is associated with
making money? I mean, I
think that putting the customer
first is one perspective, you
know, putting intellectual property and
copyright and, and, and open
source first is another philosophy,
a driving philosophy of company.
And then, you know, putting
the user first, like, are
we, are we, are we
putting money first? And then
that makes us, you know,
not good. Okay. Well, you
have to remember that any
publicly traded company has exactly
one primary overriding goal, which
is making their stockholders happy
and to bake and stockholders
are very simple crowd. They
care about making money on
the stock they bought, unless
they're doing something fancy. They
vibed some stock in some
company, and they want the
value of that company to
go up, that they can
sell the sockets of a
future date and have made
money. And so is any
publicly traded companies job to
make money. And so that's
first and foremost what they
have to do. That's just
the realities. And so Microsoft
makes money and Apple makes
money and Google makes money.
And all of these people
make money and they, they
have different philosophies of how
they do it. For example,
Microsoft is very much about,
you know, selling software that
anybody can put together. IBM
and Oracle are all about,
you know, sending out teams
of, of consultants and setting
up the software for you.
Apple is all about having
a one end to end
consumer experience that they tightly
control and Google is all
about, Hey, anything that gets
people to look at their
set of online ads, they
will happily give away for
free. Right? So that, that
cause all their revenues come
from, you know, ad impressions
and clicks on the ads.
So each one of these
companies does it differently and
they have different philosophies about
how they make money, but
they all make money. I
see. So you're saying that
it might feel like a
certain company is not evil.
It's just that they're not
getting money in a way
that you're noticing. Yeah. And
of course, well, it's, it's
funny too, because even so
I've heard people complain about
Google. In fact, they just
released their music thing yesterday
and somebody was a right
away hounding on it. Right.
Just how horrible it was.
You know, I can't say,
cause I haven't seen it.
I haven't tried it, but
no matter what you do,
someone who's going to have
a negative opinion and probably
no matter what you do,
somebody who's going to have
a positive opinion. It's really
just only a matter of,
of scale. And so, you
know, of course different companies
do different things. You know,
if, if a money, if
some company decided how to
make money by squeezing puppies,
probably that wouldn't be very
well received. Right? XN Exxon,
when they, you know, spilled
the oil all over the
place or PP more recently,
you know, they weren't exactly
the most popular guys on
the planet, but boy, they
make money hand over fist.
On the other hand, as
you say, Google, right? Consumers,
themselves rarely spend money on
anything from Google, right. You
and me. So going home,
we can use a lot
of stuff from Google for
free and Oh, and by
the way, a ton of
stuff for Microsoft for free
as well. But it's the
ads that pay the bills
for those free services. Right?
Hmm. So is it, is
it our, our business model
in that we want, we
want licensing money. That that
is like people we want
money because we're publicly traded
company and people notice it
because it's right in your
face, you buy windows. Like,
do you think that like,
people always say, why don't,
why don't we just give
windows away for $99. Right.
Isn't that like, isn't like,
if you buy iOS 10,
like upgrades, you're like 39
bucks and family packs like
200 bucks. I mean it's
pretty straight forward pricing. So
it seems like there's two
issues there. One is being
straightforward in your pricing, which
is something that we could
certainly do better. Although I
don't understand why we don't
and then there's subsidizing core
businesses with other revenue. You
know what I'm saying? Like,
does it, is it really
reasonable for us to do
that? You know what I
mean? Okay. So, so now
here's that you've just brought
two wonderful, fabulous points that
are completely different. One is
this idea that we are,
we have prices that are
too high and prices that
are varied. Now on the
too high, I will argue
with you because most people
that get windows, they don't
go out and buy windows
and install it on a
computer. They already have, they
buy new windows. If they
buy a new computer and
it comes with windows and
for that, they pay a
much smaller price than they,
if they, you know, go
and buy it off the
shelf. So, I mean, we're
talking, you know, a percentage,
a small percentage, and I
don't know what it is,
but you know, $30 as
opposed to $200, right? I
mean, it's that difference? That
much difference. So most people
don't spend very much on
windows now of course, companies
do right companies by, you
know, being license agreements. And
the reason we have all
of the different pricing is
because boy, years and years
ago, when I first started
Microsoft, we were busy pushing
windows into the enterprise because
it wasn't right. It was
kind of a mom and
pop operating system. And we
were busy competing against opp
enterprise operating systems like Solaris
and trying to get, you
know, windows and windows server
into the enterprise. And now
it's just a given that
we're there. But part of
what you have to do
there is you have to
have a variety of kinds
of pricing structures because different
companies have different needs when
it comes to how they
spend money on various kinds
of software and services. And
you just have to do
that, not from the consumer
point of view. I think
we went a little crazy
and I think we've been
pulling back on that pretty
well, But doesn't that imply
though, that Apple will, if
they move into the enterprise,
they're gonna need to come
out with like always 10
home premium. I mean, I
don't know if I buy
that Well, it's so it's
interesting. Like I say, I
think we went a little
crazy by applying those same
enterprise pricing principles to the
consumer space. And I think
we've been pulling back on
that pretty hard and that's
useful. And so we figured
that out on the other
hand, you know, if Apple
does push into the enterprise
space, I don't think you'll
see, you know, Oh, it's
10 home premium, but you
will see a bunch of
different pricing structures than they
have now simply to work
with the enterprise space. Hi,
this is Scott coming to
you from another place in
time. Are you using agile
practices to manage your software
development? There's lots of tools
in the market that manage
the steps of a project,
but most of them focus
on individual roles. Get ready
for a solution that caters
for the success of the
whole team. Guys at Tellerik
introduced team pulse. It's an
agile project management tool. That'll
help you gather ideas, estimate
plan, track progress in a
common workspace. Finally companies, regardless
of their size can use
a lightweight and convenient tool.
It makes all the stakeholders
work as a United team,
even if they're in different
countries by combining intuitive user
interface and the power server
light team poles removes the
roadblocks that you typically face
and applying agile in an
effective manner, no more lost
data, no disparate systems, no
lack of critical analytics regarding
the health and philosophy project.
See if yourself get a
free copy for five users
in one project at tellerik.com/team
pulse. And please do thank
Tellerik for supporting Hansel minutes
on their fan page. facebook.com/t
L E R I K
color. We do appreciate it.
There wouldn't be a Hansel
minutes if there wasn't Tellerik
helping us. So the first
question was like the actual
price or the can one
subsidize the price, like why
aren't we charging 900 bucks
for windows? Well, and of
course, you know, the answer
is for most people we're
charging far less than $99
from windows. What do you
mean? Do you mean when
we sell it for eight
bucks? When we buy a
PC People by computer windows
comes on? W w so
you're saying we, are you
saying that we make windows
expensive so people won't upgrade?
No, no, I think, well,
I mean, there's different price
points. Now. Now you're talking
about the science of, of,
you know, pricing, which is
really about that sweet spot
between how do you maximize
not volume or cost, but
revenue, right? Where do you
price a product such that
you get the most money
coming in? You might sell
fewer copies, but if you,
if you lowered the price,
you'd sell more copies, but
make less revenue. And so
that is a black art
Microsoft, and not just health
companies have been tweaking and
figuring out for, for, you
know, hundreds of years. And
I don't know how we
come up with our current
formula. I do know that
as a company, Microsoft does
pretty well revenue wise. So
we must be doing pretty
well on the pricing. Of
course, of course. And certainly
I think we know in
listening knows that you're not
in charge of any of
those things and, but this
is an opinion show and
I, you know, and I
definitely, Yeah, I get that.
But do I think that
we would, that people would
like this better if we
charged less for windows? I
don't know. I, I don't
hear a lot of people
complain about the price of
windows to you. I hear
people complain about the price
of windows as it relates
to other things like there's
the complexity of the price,
then there's the actual price
itself, you know? And I've
had people say like, well,
I want this feature, but
it's an ultimate and Ultimate's
400 bucks. Therefore I can't
have that feature. I see.
So I don't hear people
complain about that so much,
mostly because as I say,
most people, I know that
could windows get it with
the computer they buy, and
it just comes with whatever
version of windows it comes
with. But then, but then
you were talking about what
the idea of, of subsidizing
one product with the revenues
from another, do you mean
like, you know, keeping X-Box
afloat while it was in
the red, until it made
profits with money from windows
and office, what are you
talking about? There? Keep keeping
X-Box afloat is keeping X-Box
afloat, but making X-Box 50
bucks because we think everyone
should have an Xbox and
we will subsidize money from
advertising and Hotmail to work
on Xbox. You know, I'm
just making something up here.
You know what I mean?
Like, why don't we give
the developer tools away? Why
don't we give visual studio
away for $99 or five
bucks? Oh, well now, you
know, as well as I
do that, we give away
some pretty damn capable versions
of visual studio, right? The
express views, hell I've written
entire books with the express
skews and never missed any
of the features from the
next higher rungs up the
chain. So I think we
do pretty well there. So
you're saying that people, that
the stuff that's inside of,
of express is pretty amazing.
And then we shouldn't complain
about like Intella trace and
things that aren't available in
anything, but ultimately It's interesting.
It seems to me that
this, and this is a
cycle I've just noticed recently
is that we use the
non express use as a
way to, as a way
to figure out a set
of new features and to
develop value and differentiate for
that for the ones that
we actually sell. But more
and more we're putting those
kinds of features were, were,
we kind of moved them
down, right? We moved them
more and more features into
the express queue. So whereas
the express use used to
be very bare bones. They're
getting more and more features
from the higher level versions
that the, for money versions
of visual studio and, you
know, in four years, maybe
in tele trace will be
part of the express and
we'll have a whole nother
set of features that we
charge for in visual studio
notes. So do you think
I'm being too idealistic? Well,
it's interesting the idea that
companies don't exist to make
money and that you could
go somewhere where that wasn't
a concern is kind of
a very Portland cultural idea,
right? We have a bunch
of open source companies here.
And for some reason we
seem to have kind of
a, a generation of, of
people that live here that
are very laid back when
it comes to making money
and they just need, you
know, they're all they're willing
to live with, you know,
three or four roommates and
work at a coffee shop
in the afternoons and not
think too hard about it,
which is a very Portland
cultural idea To give people
context who don't live in
Oregon, who, or maybe people
who are overseas, who are
not familiar with Oregon. So
I live in Portland, Oregon.
You also in fact, live
in Portland, Oregon. So we
are two guys who are
not in Redmond and we
are hopefully not as affected
by the Redmond reality distortion
field. But Portland as a,
as a cultural kind of
Mecca is, is, has a
very San Francisco ASCO kind
of environment, but it's even
a little bit more kind
of Birkenstocks and socks. It's,
we're extremely relaxed here. And
money is not really a
priority over here. And the
open source community just loves
that we've had definitely thrive,
but there's an old joke
that Portland is where young
people go to retire. And
that, by the way, that
makes for a very attractive
living environment in a lot
of ways It does, but
there's not a lot of
ruthless moneymakers in Portland. So
you're implying, I think that
maybe my kind of laissez
Faire attitude towards making huge
amounts of money and preferring
a boutique software development company
is related to being a
Portlander. I think that might
well be yet. And by
the way, I mean, if
you look at those companies
that use open source, I
believe that they're doing it
to save money so that
they can keep more of
the money they make on
the software and services that
they sell. So again, there
are companies like anyone else
that want to make money.
What about company should, do
you think that companies that
have some intellectual property, like,
let's say stack overflow should
give away everything. That's not
the core intellectual property. Like
they've got lots of controls
and processes and logs and
tools around asp.net, MVC that
have nothing to do with
their stack overflowing. Should they
give out all of a
way, just because it's simply
the right thing to do,
or should they, is that
a waste of their time?
Yeah. Wow. So defined right
thing to do for me.
I mean, if I may
for profit company and I
have, you know, investor money
and revenue to pay software
engineers to produce the software
that I run my business
on, I agree that it
would be nice for stack
overflow to give away as
much of it software that
they wanted to, but I
would never make the argument
that it is the right
thing to do because they
spent money. They spent their
revenue to produce those. Now
they can gain all kinds
of Goodwill in the developer
community by doing so. And
of course, a lot of
their customers are the developer
community, but I don't think
anyone uses stack overflow or
any of the other second
exchange sites, more or less
based on whether they give
away the controls that they
use to build their site.
Do you? No, I think
you're, yeah. Your point is
that people aren't going to
stack overflow is not going
to make more money, whether
they open source their stuff
or not, they will gain
mind share and, and love.
Well, so, so that's the
thing, right? I mean, if
it does it provide a
competitive, if they're not giving
away the family jewels, right.
If they're not giving away
the things that make them
a competitor, they're not enabling
their competitors and they can
gain by giving their stuff
away, then I think that
would be a good thing
for them to do. But,
but again, I don't have
all the details, right. That's
definitely a business decision for
them to make. I already
get a ton of benefits
from the stack exchange sites
that exist and that model
that they've produced and the
way that questions and answers
work, and just the whole
things that they've set up.
And I get, I get
benefit because I learn things
on those stack exchange sites,
and those are good for
me. And, you know, if
I was building a site
that I wanted it to
make it work like stack
exchange, it would make my
life easier if it gave
my music controls. But I
don't think that would make
me use stack exchange more
or less. Then why do
I have a sense that
I think releasing source code
to help the collective is
a admirable thing for a
person and or a company
to do. And why do
I get so in a
twist when people have perfectly
good source code that would
provide value to a multiplicity
of people and they just
sit on it Well. So
I think the reason you
do that is, is the
same reason I do, which
is you and I have
dedicated our lives to making
developers' lives better, right? To
the content we produce the,
you know, books in conference
talks and blog posts, and
even tweets and add the,
the thing that gets us
up in the morning and
the thing that we push,
you know, inside of our,
our meetings and, and day
to day in our lives,
right? I mean, Microsoft serves
a large number of kinds
of different kinds of customers
and put the ones that
we have chosen to focus
on are developers. And so
we want to do everything
we can to focus on
making developers' lives better. And
so, Hey, if you look
at something, you'd be looking
at, you know, a set
of source code that we
imagine second Ching Chaz, and
you go, Hey, it doesn't
hurt you to give these
away. Why don't you give
them away? You can, of
course, you and I do
this inside of Microsoft all
the time. There's all this
goodness that happens inside of
Microsoft. And some of it
ships and recharge people and
some of it ships for
free and some of it
doesn't ship at all. Then
we, sometimes we look at
that and we go, wow,
this is really great stuff.
Why don't we give it
away? If, if we're not
going to do anything with
it or, or we haven't
decided what to do with
it, Hey, our first reflex
is let's give it to
our customers and making them
happy. And by the way,
a lot of times, a
lot, a lot of times
we do that. Sometimes we
don't, it's not just stacking
change, right? It's not just
anybody, right? It happens all
the time. But the reason
it puts us in a
twist is cause we want
them, these are our people,
right? These are the ones
we want to make happy.
Do you know the, in
Portland, there's a whole lot
Of companies that they're these
kind of open source PHP,
Ruby C you know, open
source, CMS, like, you know,
we do ticket management for
governments, or we do environmental
analysis, impact statements for people
who use our CMS or
whatever. It's that, it's that
kind of like small boutique.
It's usually like, you know,
eight to 35 people with
an open source application and
they sell kind of support.
And you're saying that that
supports a Portland desk who
take lifestyle, but could never
turn into a Microsoft or
Google or anything like that.
Like the thing that Google
really stumbled upon it seems
is advertising. Sure. And by
the way, so did Facebook,
right? Facebook hit the goldmine
with advertising too, Right? And
Facebook is entirely based on
staying connected with your friends
and being narcissistic and Google
is based on looking for
stuff. And since everyone in
the world needs to either
look for stuff or be
very narcissistic, then you pretty
much got unlimited money. Well,
it's, it's interesting, but Google
sells eyeballs based on what
people are looking for. And
Facebook sells eyeballs based on
what is happening in their
lives. These are both extremely
valuable eyeballs by the way.
And that's why they make
money, hand over fist. And
that's fine. Those are wonderful
business models, but I would
never say, in fact, I
was at a, like a
startup weekend that happened in
Portland a few weeks ago.
And I just, I just
was there for like four
or five hours to see
the final presentations. But I
was fascinated that there was
these, this group of, I
don't know, it must've been
a fifth year more people
who were there from like
three or four States away,
in some cases, marketing people
and designer people and art
people and developer people and
different kinds of developers, people,
windows, people, non-business people. And
they all came together because
they had this dream of,
Oh, I've got this one
little idea and I'm going
to do it. I'm going
to do it just right.
And I'm going to strike
it rich. And, and this
idea of all of these
venues in the mobile space
and in the web space
where you can, you know,
it's turning into a hit
based business, just like movies
and music has been it's.
The whole thing is turning
into a hit based business.
And so the whole thing
has been optimized around. What's
this little idea I'm going
to spend a little bit
of time and energy and
see if it takes off.
And if it doesn't that's
all right, I have a
dozen more to come right
behind it. That's a pretty
interesting shift in the, in
the software industry that has
really only happened in the
last three, four years. I
think it's fascinating Do w
so if, if, If Apple
Apple sells things because people
consume Google sells it because
they're searching for stuff, Facebook
does it because people want
to see what their friends
are doing. What are we
getting our money from? People
who want to check their
email. Okay. Seriously, like what's
our core, our core thing.
We're the, we're the, we're
the base of the pyramid
where the operating system. Well,
so it's interesting. So absolutely
Microsoft started out as the
base of the pyramid, right?
The operating system. But, you
know, when we started that,
and I can't even say
we, cause I was nowhere
near it, when it happened,
started all that, you know,
the, the operating, having the
idea of an operating system
that worked across a variety
of PC-based architectures was a
big deal. And it opened
up this idea of apps,
right? It was a platform
for apps. And suddenly back
then it was, Oh, people
building apps that work across
this variety. That was, that
was a goldmine, right. That
was a moneymaker in the
same way that the mobile
platform is today. And then
over time, these things happen,
right? The operating system got
richer and richer and more
and more base functionality. And
then the company itself decided,
well, you know, productivity software
is a huge area. And
so we have office. And
then, and then, you know,
we pushed heavy into the
enterprise and that's where windows
server and all IIS and
asp.net and all of that
work came from. And then
of course, developer tools has
always been a thing because
it's a platform, right? You
need developer tools and in
databases again, in the enterprise
space. And, and now recently
you started with the Xbox,
but you know, the Zune
and a windows phone seven
is really version seven, right?
We've had a bunch of
windows phones before then, right.
Pushing into the consumer space.
I think, I think the
thing that is that we
want, that we've always wanted
is windows everywhere, right? We
want this set of, of
base capabilities everywhere, whether it's
on your TV, whether it's
on your phone, whether it's
on your PC. And we
want this set of apps
that can work everywhere. And
really, it's not that the
apps so much, it's the
data, right? We want a
projection of your data as
appropriate for each of these
devices, no matter which one
you use. And I, I
think that is a laudable
goal. I think that is
in my life. It makes
my life better to be
able to get to my
various bits of data and
my various applications from each
of these platforms. And every
time we do it better,
more, it makes me happier.
It makes my life better.
I am a fan of
that word. Well, thank you
for taking the time to,
with me today about your
ideas. I don't know how
things are going, but I
know that I'm going to
stay at Microsoft as long
as I can push, push
my agenda. My Portland, my,
my hippie Portland agenda to
release it. Well, you keep
pushing it. Scott, you're doing
a good work. All right.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'll
see you again next week.